first draft user interaction chapter (#12)
eclipse-sprotty/sprotty-website: hugo/content/docs/user_interaction.md

---
title: 'User Interaction'
Weight: 900
---

## Interacting with a Sprotty Diagram
Sprotty offers multiple mouse and keyboard interactions by default listed in the following tables.
The `CTRL` key in the following is equal to the `CMD` key on Mac.

| Mouse       
| ----------------- | ---- |
| left-click:       | toggle selection |
| CTRL-click:       | add to/remove from selection |
| left-click : drag | move selection (when on selected element) |
| left-click : drag | pan viewport (when on diagram background) |
| mouse wheel:    | zoom |

| Touchpad
| --------------------- | --- |
|click                  | toggle selection |
|drag                   | move selection (when on selected element) |
|two-finger pan up/down | zoom |
|zoom                   | zoom |

| Keys
| ---------- | --- |
|CTRL-SHIFT-A| select all |
|CTRL-SHIFT-C| center selection, or if nothing is selected center the entire diagram |
|CTRL-SHIFT-E| export diagram to SVG |
|CTRL-SHIFT-F| zoom selection to fill the entire canvas, or if nothing is selected zoom the entire diagram |
|CTRL-Z      | undo |
|CTRL-SHIFT-Z| redo |

## Creating Custom Interaction

### Buttons and Button Handlers

> The easiest way to create custom interactions is through buttons. Buttons in Sprotty work similarly to the other model elements. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Buttons in Sprotty work similarly to the other model elements, but they enable you to directly hook up handlers that react to the push of a button.
```

Not sure if we should claim implementing buttons are easier than mouse or keyboard listeners. :-)

As in the other examples with other types of nodes, we first need to define the model and view class and define its type ID. in addition, we also need to define a button handler of type `IButtonHandler`.

```Typescript
const container = new ContainerModule((bind, unbind, isBound, rebind) => { 
        const context = { bind, unbind, isBound, rebind };
        configureModelElement(context, 'graph', SGraph, SGraphView);
        configureModelElement(context, 'button:custom', SButton, CustomButtonView);

        configureButtonHandler({bind, isBound}, 'button:custom', CustomButtonHandler);

        configureViewerOptions(context, {
            needsClientLayout: true,
            baseDiv: 'sprotty'
        });

    });
```

A button handler is a simple injectable class with a `buttonPressed(button: SButton): Action[]` method. 

> returned actions are passed to the `ActionDispatcher` to be handled there. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The actions that this method returns are passed to the `ActionDispatcher` to be handled there.
```
We may want to add a link to `docs/overview.md` / Action Dispatcher here eventually.

Author: rebased the branch and added links to overview and dependency injection chapter

```Typescript
@injectable()
export class CustomButtonHandler implements IButtonHandler {
    buttonPressed(button: SButton): Action[] {
        alert('button on' + button.parent.id + ' pressed');
        return [];
    }
}
```

### Mouse and Keyboard listeners

> Sprotty also offers the ability to attach mouse and keyboard listeners either through registering `MouseListener` or `KeyListener`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sprotty also offers the ability to attach mouse and keyboard listeners by registering `MouseListener` or `KeyListener`.
```

> this can be simply done by binding the custom listener to the respective listener type in your DI-container like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be simply done by binding the custom listener to the respective listener type in your DI-container like this:
```

> Sprotty also offers the ability to attach mouse and keyboard listeners by registering `MouseListener` or `KeyListener`.
> This can be simply done by binding the custom listener to the respective listener type in your DI-container like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sprotty also offers the ability to attach mouse and keyboard listeners reacting to events of a Sprotty diagram.
This can be simply done by binding custom implementations of `MouseListener` or `KeyListener` as follows:
```

```Typescript
    bind(CustomMouseListener).toSelf().inSingletonScope();
    bind(TYPES.MouseListener).toService(CustomMouseListener);
```
These listeners are global, meaning they react to every interaction with the diagram. A very simple mouse Listener would look like this: 
```Typescript
export class CustomMouseListener extends MouseListener {
    doubleClick(target: SModelElement, event: MouseEvent): (Action | Promise<Action>)[] {
        alert('double clicked ' + target.id)
        return [];
    }
}
```
If only specific types of nodes are supposed to be interacted with through this custom listener, it's recommended to [create a custom feature](no-link-yet).

### projection bars
Another interactive Sprotty feature is the `ProjectedViewportView`.
This view automatically adds a vertical and horizontal scrollbar to our diagram view in which our current viewport is shown, like in the following image.

![projection bar example](/projection_bar_example.png)

To activate this feature, instead of using `SGraph` and `SGraphView` for our root element, as we did in the other examples, we use `ViewportRootElement` and `ProjectedViewportView`.

> The through `ProjectedViewportView` created scrollbars can be styled through the `.sprotty-viewport` and `.sprotty-projection-bar` CSS classes. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The scrollbars created through `ProjectedViewportView` can be styled via the `.sprotty-viewport` and `.sprotty-projection-bar` CSS classes. 
```

As we can see in the image, these scrollbars can contain projections of our nodes, which show their horizontal and vertical position. 
Double-clicking on a projection will center the view on the node the projection belongs to. 

To add projections we add the `Projectable` type to the nodes in our model schema like this:
```Typescript
 <SNode & Projectable>{
            id: 'svg',
            type: 'node:svg',
            text: '',
            projectionCssClasses: ['svg-projection']
}
```

> This requires us to add the `projectionCssClasses` property to the node which the view can evaluate to style the projections. We need at least one class, otherwise, no projection will be created.
> The projections are simple HTML `div` elements, which can be styled through the classes we set through `projectionCssClasses`. 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Projectable` interface requires us to specify the `projectionCssClasses` property, which defines the CSS classes the framework will apply to the HTML `div` element that represents the projection in the projection bar. If no `projectionCssClasses` property value is specified, no projection will be created.
As projections are simple HTML `div` elements positioned on the projection bar, they can easily be styled as follows:

```css
.svg-projection {
    background-color: rgba(255, 153, 0, 0.5);
}
```
```
